So far, we've seen that when we
pass a parameter into a function,
the default is pass by value.
That means a copy of the
actual parameter is made.
We also saw that when we pass an
array into a function, we don't make
a copy, instead we use the location
of the array, which means we can
change it from within the function.
Well, sometimes we want to
be able to change an actual
parameter from within a function.
As we saw with arrays, this
is achieved by passing in the
location of the actual parameter.
We can do this in c++ for any
variable type not just arrays
by using reference parameters.
Reference parameters create an alias.
So now the formal parameter
in the function is an alias
to the actual parameter.
No copy is made.
When you change the formal parameter,
you're changing the actual parameter.
This is called pass by reference,
and it's really easy to achieve
in c++ by using the ampersand
symbol in the parameter list.
Let's see an example.
In this example, we have a
function named scale number.
Notice that the parameter list to
the function is not an int name num,
it's a reference to an int name num.
That's what the ampersand does so.
Now when we use num in the
function body, we're referencing
the actual parameter.
Let's walk through this.
In main, we declare an integer
number and initialize it to 1000.
Then we call the scale number
function and pass in the
actual parameter number.
We now transfer control to the
scale number function since the
formal parameter in the scale number
function is a reference parameter.
This means that num is
an alias for number.
If we change num,
we're changing number.
Behind the scenes, the
location of numbers being
passed into the function.
So the code in scale number
checks to see if the number
is greater than one 100.
In this case, it is.
It's one 1000.
So we set num to 100, and
the function completes.
When we return to main and display
number, it will display 100.
Pass by reference can be super
useful for several reasons.
First, it allows us to change an
actual parameter if we need to.
Second, we don't make a
copy of the parameter, which
could be large and take time.
But we have to be aware of
potentially unwanted changes.
Let's see how we could swap two
numbers using pass by reference.
In this example, we're writing a
function that swaps the values of
the two integers passed into it.
Take a look at main.
X is 10 and y is 20.
X and y are first displayed, and
we get 10 20,
just as we expect.
Then we call swap and pass in x y.
Then we display x and y again.
Now they're 20 and 10.
We swap them.
Look at the function definition
and notice that both a and
b are reference parameters.
So when I call this function
with x and y, a and b become
aliases to x and y, respectively.
In the body of the function,
I set temp to a, then a
to b, and then b to temp.
And we've swapped the two
values that were passed into us.
What do you think would happen if
we didn't use pass by reference
and we used pass by value?
Well, the actuals would be copied,
so we would swap the copies in
the function and then return.
When we get back to main, the
actuals haven't changed since
we were working with copies.
Let's talk a bit about how
parameters are passed into functions.
Let's see what happens when we pass
in a vector object to a function.
In this case, I have a
function called print, and it
expects a vector of integers.
Notice that in this case
we're using pass by value.
Inside the print function, I simply
use a range based for loop and display
the vector elements, pretty easy.
But there's one issue with this code
that is we're using pass by value.
So we're making a complete copy of
the vector object in the function.
So the formal parameter v
will be a copy of the actual
parameter data in this case.
In order to make a copy, we need to
allocate storage and copy values over.
If the vector is very
large, we could run it to
performance and storage issues.
So why don't we use pass by reference
instead so we can avoid the copy.
Let's do it.
Notice that now I'm using pass by
reference since I've declared the
formal parameter v as a reference
parameter using the ampersand.
The output of this program is
exactly the same as before,
but we avoid the storage and
copy overhead of pass by value.
But there is one issue, since
I'm using pass by reference,
the print function could
change the value of the vector.
It could even erase the entire vector.
This is probably not a good idea.
So let's tell the compiler that
this is a constant reference.
So now I've added the const
keyword to the parameter.
Now I've told the compiler to
use pass by constant reference.
So if I try to make any changes
to the formal parameter v in the
function, I will get a compiler error.
This is really the best of both worlds
since we're more efficiently passing
information to the function, but
we're still ensuring that the function
can't change the data by mistake.
Let's head over to the IDE
and see this in action.
Okay, so now I'm in the IDE, and
I'm in the section 11 workspace
in the pass by reference project.
This is the same project that we
used when we did pass by value.
The only thing I've changed
is I've made the parameters
reference parameters now.
So you can see the way I did that
was just by including that ampersand.
Now these are the same function
prototypes I've just named the
functions pass by ref1 rather than
pass by value, as we had before.
Okay, so I've got three pass by
reference functions and just a
simple print vector function that
displays a vector element by element.
Pass by reference1 expects a reference
to an integer, pass by reference2
a reference to a string, pass by
reference3 a reference to a vector.
And then the print vector
function expects a reference to
a constant vector because I don't
want to be able to change the
vector from the print function.
Now I've implemented all of
these functions and basically
the code hasn't changed from
before I set number to a 1000.
I set the string to change and I
clear all the elements out of there.
Now if you remember before,
we printed a value, we called
the function, we came back and
the old value was still there.
Well, now it's totally
different because we're
passing an alias to the value.
Okay, so let's go
through these examples.
Here, in main, I've got numb
initialized to 10 and another
num initialized to 20.
So now what I'm doing is
I'm calling pass by ref1.
And I'm passing num into it.
So before I call it, I
expect this to display a 10.
But then after I call it, I
don't expect the 10 anymore
because I've passed a reference.
Instead, if you look at
pass by ref1, num is a 1000.
So I expect num to change.
All right, so let me run this,
and then we'll walk through
exactly what's going on.
There you go.
Before calling passed
by ref1, we have a 10.
After calling pass by
ref1, we have a 1000.
If you remember the way it was with
call by value we had 10 and 10.
All right, so let's see
what's really going on here.
Let me scroll up just a little bit.
There we go.
Okay, so I'm in main,
and I've got num is 10.
And I'm displaying
it right here, right.
So that's going to display a 10 in
that output statement right here.
But then I'm calling pass by ref.
So I'm going to call pass by ref1
over here, and it has a variable.
And if you remember what
that variable was, let me
scroll up, it's right here.
And it's also called num.
Remember, this could
be any other name.
They just happen to be the
same name in this case.
So that's got a variable
in there called num.
And right here, what's
happening is when I pass this
num into it, then this num now
becomes an alias to that num.
Okay, and again, don't
worry about the names.
I'm going to use a
different name next time.
But it's common to many
times use the same name, so
don't let that confuse you.
And then in here I'm saying num
equals I believe it was a 1000.
So what's happening is this
is an alias to this number.
So this guy's going
to change to a 1000.
Real, real different to call by value.
Okay, so in this case, we are
really passing in the location
of the number behind the scenes.
But we don't have to worry
about it because syntactically
it's the same as call by value.
Let's take a look at
another example here.
I'll scroll down just a little bit.
And here we've got the same call
to pass by ref1 except we're
passing in another number, right.
In this case, another number is 20.
So this will display a 20.
And when I get back, it
will have changed also.
There it is, 10 1000.
Now we've got another num
was 20, and now it's a 1000.
So you can see that we're passing that
by reference and the alias is actually
referring to the actual parameter.
That's the important part
to really understand here.
In this example, let's
take a look at that.
If you recall this one, let me scroll
up just a little bit so you can see
it right here, pass by ref2 expects
a reference to a string, and it
just assigns changed to that string.
Okay, so let's walk through this
one and see what we can expect.
In this case, I've got this
variable right here name, which
is Frank and it's in main, and
it's a string object, right.
Then I call pass by ref2.
So here's passed by ref2, and it
has a variable over there called
s, that's the formal parameter.
And what we're doing here is we're
passing by reference, so we're
passing name over here and this
s will now be an alias to name.
So it's really referring
to the actual parameter.
Remember, this right here
is the actual parameter.
So now when I change this to
change, nothing happens over here,
it's actually happening over here.
So this is gone.
It's now changed.
So when this function is done,
my actual parameter has changed,
in this case, to changed.
Okay, so let's run this example,
and we'll be able to see that
that string really does change.
You see that right there, name
before calling pass by ref2 is Frank.
Name after calling pass by
ref2 is changed, pretty easy.
It's really up to you.
And when you're designing, do you
need the actual changed or not?
If you do need a change,
you pass it by reference.
If you don't need a change,
you do pass by value.
Sometimes pass by value is very
expensive, as I mentioned before.
So you want to pass by reference
and then qualify it to be constant.
And that's what we'll do in the
print function a little bit.
But let's take a look
at this one here.
Okay, so this is the last
example we'll look at right here.
Remember, we're calling passed
by rer3 and pass by ref3 all it
does is clears out that vector.
So it's going to remove
all the vector elements.
It's going make the vector empty.
Okay, so let's do that.
All right, so we're here.
This is stooges.
And again, stooges
is declared in main.
So stooges is basically three
strings: Larry, Moe and Curly.
And they're in a vector.
Okay, so now I'm going
to print the vector.
And I'm going to pass
stooges into print vector.
Now the vector is also
expecting a reference.
In this case, a constant reference
so I can't change anything.
So what happens is when I call print,
so when I call print vector,
there's a variable over there called v.
And since I'm doing pass by
reference, this refers to this.
So whenever I deal with I do any
operation on v, it's affecting
the stooges vector, right.
That would be the case.
But since this is const,
this is read-only.
There's no changes allowed.
But I avoid the whole copy
issue which is important.
All right, so that
takes care of print.
Now when I call pass by reference3,
I do exactly the same thing, right.
So I call pass by reference3.
I've got my vector, and it's
also pointing to stooges.
Now when I say v.clear, I'm
clearing this out now, right.
So stooges is empty now.
When this when this
function is done, it's gone.
And my vector is empty.
So when I print it out again right
here, you'll see nothing print.
If you recall in the pass by
value, it printed out Larry
Moe and Curly again, right.
Here nothing.
So let's run this, and you could see
right here stooges before calling
pass by ref3: Larry, Moe Curly.
After calling it, empty.
Why is it empty because pass by
ref3 cleared out that vector.
It deleted all the elements.
And because I'm passing
by reference, it's really
affecting the actual object.
If I didn't want this to happen, I
would make this const in which case
this won't compile anymore because
you're not allowing me to change the
vector, which is what this is doing.
You'll get a lot of chances to
play with this in the challenge
at the end of the section.
But that's passed by reference, we
can use it with simple primitive types
or we can use it with object types.
It basically works the same way.
Just think of it as an alias
to the actual parameter.